GH-100108: Add async generators best practices section (#141885)
python/cpython: Doc/library/asyncio-dev.rst

      File "../t.py", line 4, in bug
        raise Exception("not consumed")
    Exception: not consumed

Asynchronous generators best practices

> ======================================

Reviewer: I'd insert some friendly words here introducing the reader to the purpose of this section. Right now it looks rather stern.

Author: I tried to add some friendly introduction.

> By :term:`asynchronous generator` in this section we will mean

Reviewer 2: This seems obvious, by generator we typically mean the generator object not the function.

Author: I saw this clarification in few places (e.g. https://docs.python.org/3/glossary.html#term-asynchronous-generator), so I thought it was worth mentioning. I'm OK to remove this if you think so.

Reviewer: In my experience, the term "generator" is used equally for a generator function and for the iterator returned by calling a generator function. If you really only use it for the latter, then this clarification makes sense.

> an :term:`asynchronous generator iterator` that returned by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
an :term:`asynchronous generator iterator` that is returned by an
```

:term:`asynchronous generator` function.

Manually close the generator
----------------------------

> If an asynchronous generator happens to exit early by :keyword:`break`, the caller

Reviewer 2: This feels too heavy for start, I would start it as "It is recommended to manually close the generator... " then in second para describe the issue with breaking early.

Author: Thanks, will fix this.

Reviewer: IIUC the scenario(s) you are trying to describe is where the code iterating over the generator doesn't iterate till the end. If you're iterating over it using a for-loop (there are other ways!) that could be a break in that for-loop, or the task containing that for-loop getting canceled, or indeed an exception being raised in the for-loop body. But I'm not sure it's helpful to try to list all the reasons why this can happen -- maybe the most useful one to mention is an exception being raised during that for-loop?

(The example code clarifies a lot!)

Author: Tried to rephrase.

task being cancelled, or other exceptions, the generator's async cleanup code
will run and possibly raise exceptions or access context variables in an

> unexpected context--perhaps after the lifetime of tasks it depends, or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will run in an unexpected context -- perhaps after the lifetime of tasks it depends on, or
```

during the event loop shutdown when the async-generator garbage collection hook
is called.

To prevent this, it is recommended to explicitly close the async generator by

> calling :meth:`~agen.aclose` method, or using :func:`contextlib.aclosing` context

Reviewer: ```suggestion
calling the :meth:`~agen.aclose` method, or using a :func:`contextlib.aclosing` context
```

manager::

  import asyncio
  import contextlib

  async def gen():
    yield 1
    yield 2

  async def func():
    async with contextlib.aclosing(gen()) as g:
      async for x in g:

>         break

Reviewer: I'd add a comment here, e.g.

```suggestion
        break  # Don't iterate until the end
```

  asyncio.run(func())

Only create a generator when a loop is already running
------------------------------------------------------

As said above, if an asynchronous generator is not resumed before it is
finalized, then any finalization procedures will be delayed. The event loop
handles this situation and doing it best to call async generator-iterator's
:meth:`~agen.aclose` at the proper moment, thus allowing any pending

> :keyword:`!finally` clauses to execute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
handles this situation and doing its best to call the async generator-iterator's
:meth:`~agen.aclose` method at the proper moment, thus allowing any pending
:keyword:`!finally` clauses to run.
```

Then it is recomended to create async generators only after the event loop

> has already been created.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I follow how it follows from the previous paragraph (which describes that finalization of an async generator-iterator may be delayed if its body hasn't finished yet) to the recommendation of creating them only after an event loop exists.

Author: The explanation in this section is incorrect. I looked into it again and will rewrite it.

Avoid iterating and closing the same generator concurrently
-----------------------------------------------------------

> The async generators allow to be reentered while another

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Async generators may to be reentered while another
```

> :meth:`~agen.aclose`/:meth:`~agen.aclose`/:meth:`~agen.aclose` call is in

Reviewer: Why is ```:meth:`~agen.aclose` ``` repeated three times here?

progress. This may lead to an inconsistent state of the async generator

> and cause errors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and can cause errors.
```

  import asyncio

  async def consumer():
      for idx in range(100):
          await asyncio.sleep(0)
          message = yield idx
          print('received', message)

  async def amain():
      agenerator = consumer()
      await agenerator.asend(None)

      fa = asyncio.create_task(agenerator.asend('A'))
      fb = asyncio.create_task(agenerator.asend('B'))
      await fa
      await fb

  asyncio.run(amain())

Output::

  received A
  Traceback (most recent call last):
    File "test.py", line 38, in <module>
      asyncio.run(amain())
      ~~~~~~~~~~~^^^^^^^^^
    File "Lib\asyncio\runners.py", line 204, in run
      return runner.run(main)
             ~~~~~~~~~~^^^^^^
    File "Lib\asyncio\runners.py", line 127, in run
      return self._loop.run_until_complete(task)
             ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~^^^^^^
    File "Lib\asyncio\base_events.py", line 719, in run_until_complete
      return future.result()
             ~~~~~~~~~~~~~^^
    File "test.py", line 36, in amain
      await fb
  RuntimeError: anext(): asynchronous generator is already running

Therefore, it is recommended to avoid using the async generators in parallel

> tasks or in the multiple event loops.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, it is recommended to avoid using async generators in parallel
tasks or from multiple event loops.
```

      File "../t.py", line 4, in bug
        raise Exception("not consumed")
    Exception: not consumed

Asynchronous generators best practices
======================================

By :term:`asynchronous generator` in this section we will mean
an :term:`asynchronous generator iterator` that returned by
:term:`asynchronous generator` function.

Manually close the generator
----------------------------

If an asynchronous generator happens to exit early by :keyword:`break`, the caller
task being cancelled, or other exceptions, the generator's async cleanup code
will run and possibly raise exceptions or access context variables in an
unexpected context--perhaps after the lifetime of tasks it depends, or
during the event loop shutdown when the async-generator garbage collection hook
is called.

To prevent this, it is recommended to explicitly close the async generator by
calling :meth:`~agen.aclose` method, or using :func:`contextlib.aclosing` context
manager::

  import asyncio
  import contextlib

  async def gen():
    yield 1
    yield 2

  async def func():
    async with contextlib.aclosing(gen()) as g:
      async for x in g:
        break

  asyncio.run(func())

> 

Reviewer 3: You have inconsistent spacing between sections.

Author: Thanks.

Only create a generator when a loop is already running
------------------------------------------------------

> As said abovew, if an asynchronous generator is not resumed before it is

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As said above, if an asynchronous generator is not resumed before it is
```
